# Accessing members of a collection by using it as a **verb**

## 4clojure's 21st problem

The question of this problem was to reimplement `nth`. `nth` retrieves the nth item of a collection. Since I know a little bit of Scheme I immediately reached for a recursive pattern. This is definitely possible for this problem but there must be a better solution that I did not think about. And if I don't force myself I will not be learning much Clojure.

My answer, with a recursion `(fn nthel [l n] (if (= n 0) (first l) (nthel (rest l) (- n 1))))`

## Accessing members

However it is possible to access a vector's members by using the vector as verb:

```clojure

user=> ([:a :b :c] 1) ; :b

```

My new solution is much shorter:

```clojure

(fn nthel [l n] ((vec l) n))

```

It was interesting to see that most of the people who completed all of the 4clojure problems also used a recursion.

# Clojure from the Ground Up -- [Chapter 3](https://aphyr.com/posts/303-clojure-from-the-ground-up-functions)

## Let bindings

`let` lets you declare a symbol, within a specific expression. This looks like a local variable.

-   It takes a vector, and we alternate between symbol and meaning.

-   They will be executed in order.

-   Symbols won't be accessible outside of the expression.

-   You can also override an existing symbol.

-   `let`s cannot be reassigned.

### Example

```clojure
(let [cats 5]
    (str "I have " cats " cats.")) ; will return "I have 5 cats."
```

# Vars

Vars are mutable variables and use the `def` keyword to be created. It's a different type of value. It binds a symbol to a value, like this `(def cats 5)`. This is to be used carefully in Clojure.

## Functions

**Functions** are like verbs, `inc` is a symbol which points to a "verb". In this case, `inc` is short for increment. You can refer to a symbol without evaluating it with a quote, so like `'inc`, which will return `inc`. It will be the case for every value and also function calls like `'(inc 1)`. I have started collecting [here](../functions.md) the functions that I encounter. You always put the function first and can add the arguments afterwards. A function is like a `let`, but unbound. It's also evaluated later, when it is passed arguments. It's created with `fn`.

### Function shorthand A function written like this `(fn [x] (+ x 2))` can be rewritten like this `#(+ x 2)`, or if it has several arguments `%1`, `%2` are to be used.

### Naming functions

### All the ways to declare a function in Clojure

#### Anonymous functions

```clojure
(fn [x] (+ x 1))
#(+ % 1)
(partial + 1)
```

#### Named functions

```clojure
(def incr (fn [x] (+ x 1)))
(defn incr [x] (+ x 1))
(fn incr [x] (+ x 1))
```

### Passing arguments to functions

You can create a function that takes no argument with `[]`.

It is possible to declare a function that will take different numbers of arguments: 0, 1 or more. This is how you define them, you give it a list:

```clojure
(defn incr
([] 1)
([x] (+ x 1)))
```

You can also create a function that takes an unlimited number of arguments: it will lump all the "extra" arguments after `&` together in a list. Anything before the `$` is mandatory.

```clojure
(defn vargs
    [x y & more-args]
    {:x x
     :y y
     :more more-args})
```

# Other Updates

-   Added 12 functions to [the cheatsheet](../functions.md)
-   Did 7 [4clojure problems](../code/4clojure.md)

# Little ClojureFam update

You can now track my progress in the ClojureFam repository as well, I created [my learner card](https://github.com/athensresearch/ClojureFam/issues/27)!

# Meta Commentary

I already find myself going back to my notes and cheatsheet, more often than going back to the original text. In a way I trust what I have been writing, which is vastly different than when I was in school. That may be explained by the fact that I can actually go at my own pace here.
