# Learning Clojure in Public - Week 1 Day 6 (6/35)

## Expectations

For today I had very low expectations as I am travelling. The goal was to read some of Chapter 7 (which covers the way a Clojure project is structured -- it's called logistics for a reason). It's a long one too so the expectation is not to finish it. I expect to take very little notes as it is more akin to discover how the projects are structured, rather than learn anything.

## What I learned

I tagged along this chapter by creating a new folder `./code/cftgu-chapter6/`.

### Namespaces

A namespace is set like this `(ns namespace-name.core)`. This will dictate how to retrieve symbols. A symbol is always accessible by prepending the namespace name as well: `(namespace-name/foo)`.

Note that namespaces automatically include `clojure.core` which includes all the standard functions.

To set a namespace and include another one as well one can use `(ns user (:require [scratch.core]))`. It means that the user namespace needs access to `scratch.core`. It's also possible to give a shortname to an imported namespace like this `(**ns **user (:require [scratch.core :as c]))`. It's even possible to avoid writing the namespace entirely for a specific function by importing it like this `(ns user (:require [scratch.core :refer [foo]]))`: `foo` will be accessible without the namespace.

### Exploring data

To explore JSON in Clojure we use a library called Cheshire that we get from the NPM of Clojure, Clojars. We just need to add it to the dependencies in `project.clj`.

````clojure
user=> (use 'cheshire.core)
user=> (first (parse-string (slurp "2008.json") true))
{:robbery 22,
 :aggravated_assaults 33,
 :coverage_indicator 97,
 :drug_abuse_violationstotal 203,```
So we got this array of objects and they all have the same properties. We can get the values of all of the same keyword:
```clojure
user=> (->> data (map :driving_under_influence))
(198
 1095
 114
 98
...)
````

To get the max `user=> (->> data (map :driving_under_influence) (apply max))`, or to get the n largest (10):

```clojure
user=> (->> data (map :driving_under_influence) sort (take-last 10))
(8589 10432 10443 10814 11439 13983 17572 18562 26235 45056)
```

To get the frequencies, `user=> (->> data (map :driving_under_influence) frequencies)`.

To produce some sort of histogram:

```clojure
user=> (->> data (map :driving_under_influence) frequencies (sort-by key) pprint)
([0 227]
 [1 24]
 [2 17]
 [3 20]
```

It means that 227 counties report no DIUs.

We can "zoom out" of the data set and see the other key values too:

```clojure
user=> (->> data (sort-by :driving_under_influence) (take-last 10) pprint)
({:other_assaults 3096,
  :gambling_all_other 3,
  :arson 106,
  :have_stolen_property 698,
```

We use `mapcat` to map and concatenate at the same time.

```user=> (->> data (sort-by :driving_under_influence) (take-last 10) (mapcat keys) (into (sorted-set)) pprint)#{:aggravated_assaults :all_other_offenses_except_traffic :arson
  :auto_thefts :bookmaking_horsesport :burglary :county_population
  :coverage_indicator :curfew_loitering_laws :disorderly_conduct
```

We can extract several keywords at the same time:

```clojure
user=> (->> data (sort-by :driving_under_influence) (take-last 10) (map #(select-keys % [:driving_under_influence :fips_county_code :fips_state_code])) pprint)
({:fips_state_code "06",
  :fips_county_code "067",
  :driving_under_influence 8589}
 {:fips_state_code "48",
  :fips_county_code "201",
  :driving_under_influence 10432}
```

## Takeaways

Today I learned the basics of setting up a Clojure project, how namespaces work and the basics of Clojure testing. Nothing very complicated which was perfect for today. I am glad we covered tests (I don't like writing them, at all, but they serve a purpose).

Also got an introduction of how to process JSON and extract the relevant information. I'm looking forward to finishing this chapter tomorrow.

Let's end the day with a tally of what I completed:

-   More than half of Chapter 7 of Clojure From the Ground Up
-   Setting up a dummy project
