# Learning Clojure in Public - Week 1 Day 3

Another day, more Clojure concepts. This is day 3 of learning Clojure in public, with Athens' ClojureFam. I'm changing the the format of these posts and will be using the one I saw in my cohort-mate Mani's repository, [learn-clojure-in-public](https://github.com/itsrainingmani/learn-clojure-in-public/blob/master/week1/june-23-2020.md), so here we go!

## Expectations

Yesterday I was a little bit disappointed with my performance on 4Clojure, it took me a lot longer to complete 7 problems than the 20 I did on Monday. Difficulty goes up, so that's expected. I also don't know how to use `map` and `reduce` in Clojure so I reached for recursion every single time. So today I decided to focus on Clojure From the Ground Up. Luckily Chapter 4 covers reduce & co. as well as recursion.
My initial expectation was to complete Chapter 4 and 5. However, after chatting with my cohort-mate I found out that Chapter 5 (which covers macros) can easily be skipped: it's complicated, not really necessary to contribute to Athens and I can easily do it at a later date. I would rather solidify my learning

## What I learned

### Clojure from the Ground Up -- [Chapter 4](https://aphyr.com/posts/304-clojure-from-the-ground-up-sequences)

The first part of this chapter was introducing recursions which was nice to go over again, but so far I have the opposite problem: I use recursions all the time in lisps. I was happy to cover the `if` function though.

This chapter mostly felt like a laundry list of functions to manipulate sequences. I added them all to my [function cheatsheet](../functions.md) and it didn't really feel necessary to document this here, it would be redundant. I did learn some new things though:
For instance that strings are sequences too! You can break a string into a sequence of characters with `seq` and rebuild it with `apply` and `str` like so `(apply str (reverse "woolf"))`.

I was also quite impressed with some function, which I feel I have built myself many times over and are already there in Clojure. I found out that you can leverage quite niche tools from Java as well. If you want to figure out if a letter is uppercase or not you can call `#(Character/isUpperCase %)`.
Among the functions that I was happy to see, were:

-   `frequencies` will count how many times an element appears in a sequence. `(frequencies [:meow :mrrrow :meow :meow])` will return `{:meow 3, :mrrrow 1}`
-   `group-by` group sequences by a function, for instance

```clojure
user=> (pprint (group-by :first [{:first "Li"    :last "Zhou"}
    {:first "Sarah" :last "Lee"}
    {:first "Sarah" :last "Dunn"}
    {:first "Li"    :last "O'Toole"}])){"Li"    [{:last "Zhou", :first "Li"}   {:last "O'Toole", :first "Li"}],
    "Sarah" [{:last "Lee", :first "Sarah"} {:last "Dunn", :first "Sarah"}]}
```

-   And of course the famed `reduce`! It takes a function and will run it on the first two elements (unless you pass a starting value) and then run again on the result of that function and the next value. `(reduce f default-value coll)`

At the end of the chapter, the book walks you through building a function to find the sum of the products of consecutive pairs of the first 1000 odd integers. Here is my answer with a lot of help from the book:

```clojure
(reduce +
	(take 1000
          (map (fn [pair] (* (first pair) (second pair)))
               (partition 2 1 (filter odd? (iterate inc 0))))))
```

#### The difference between collections and sequences

Every sequence is a collection, but not every collection is a sequence.
The `seq` function makes it possible to convert a collection into a sequence. Any object supporting `first` and `rest` functions is a sequence.

#### Problems from Chapter 4

Chapter 4 of Clojure From the Ground Up is the first one that comes with exercises. Here are my answers and choices for the first three. I decided to skip the prime number question because there's probably better use of my clojure learning time.

##### Write a function to find out if a string is a palindrome–that is, if it looks the same forwards and backwards.

The first idea that I get here is always to use a recursion. I know I won't have any issue so I looked for another solution.
An easy one that is almost cheating is reversing the string and making sure it matches:

```clojure
(defn palindrome? [word]
    (= word (apply str (reverse word))))
```

##### Find the number of ‘c’s in “abracadabra”.

I can find of a few solutions for this one. How about using `frequencies` that I liked so much when I read about it in the chapter?

```clojure
(defn countc [string]
    (last (first
        (filter (fn [pair] (= (first pair) \c))
            (frequencies string)))))
```

Another easy way would be to keep the c's only and the count the members of the sequence:

```clojure
(defn countc [string]
    (count
    	(filter (fn [l] (= l \c))
         	(seq string))))
```

##### Write your own version of filter.

```clojure
(defn my-filter [f xs]
    (reduce
        (fn [v e]
            (if (f e) (conj v e) v))
        [] xs))

(my-filter pos? [1 2 -1 1 0 1 -1])
```

### 4clojure

Today I did 16 4clojure problems which brings my total number of complete problems to 43! I have added my answers to the [4clojure](../code/4clojure.md) document.

## Takeaways

Even though I decided to skip Chapter 5 for now and didn't match my expectations, I am glad I did. I have taken in a lot information in the past few days. I wouldn't want to overload myself with too much, and time spent applying this new knowledge is probably better spent. It's not a sprint, but a marathon! I will make sure over the next few days to spend some time to review and make flash cards. This will most likely be tomorrow and over the weekend when I will either have less time, or will be away from a computer.

Today has been the most active day for our ClojureFam cohort: we've been exchanging tips, solutions and encouragement. I hope this continues like this.

Let's end the day with a tally of what I completed:

-   Chapter 4 of Clojure From the Group Up
-   3 problems from that chapter
-   16 4clojure problems
