# Learning Clojure in Public - Week 1 Day 5 (5/35)

## Expectations

After yesterday where I got started on Chapter 6 in Clojure from the Group Up (where I did much more than I thought I would), today I expected to finish what I started. That meant reading the last part of Chapter 6, completing the exercises (the ones in Chapter 4 were difficult, let's see about these), and use any remaining time to do more 4clojure problems. The [next checkpoint](https://github.com/athensresearch/ClojureFam/issues/27) in terms of problems is 60, and I am 17 short so I expect to reach that milestone early next week.

## What I Learned

### Atoms

Atoms store a value. You can access the value held in an atom with `(defer xs)`, or the shorthand `@xs`.
One can set the value of an atom with `reset!`, like so `(reset! xs :foo)`.
The value can be updated with `swap!`, but swap takes a pure function that takes in the current value and returns the updated value, but you can also call `(swap! x + 5 6)` which will call `(+ 5 6)` to find the new value.
Interestingly a thread-safe version of `(dotimes [i 10] (future (def xs (conj xs i))))` becomes `(dotimes [i 10] (future (swap! xs conj i)))` (after `def`ing the vars).
It's thread-safe, linearizable and a great way to represent state.

### Refs

Refs are for multi-identity updates. `(def x (ref 0))`. `ref-set` sets, `alter` updates and both need to be wrapped in a `dosync` expression.

```clojure
user=> (def x (ref 0))
user=> (def y (ref 0))
user=> (dosync
         (ref-set x 1)
         (ref-set y 2))
2
user=> [@x @y]
[1 2]

user=> (dosync
         (alter x + 2)
         (alter y inc))
3
user=> [@x @y]
[3 3]
```

`commute` is a better alternative if the order of operations doesn't matter.
`ensure` lets you read values from one ref to compute the other

```clojure
user=> (dosync
         (alter x + (ensure y)))
```

Refs are slower than atoms and should only be used when updating multiple pieces of state.

### Summary table for future reference

-   **Symbols** are immutable, transparent and their scope is lexical
-   **Vars** are mutable, transparent, unrestricted (for updates) and their scope is dynamic
-   **Delays** are mutable, their read is blocking, updates are only once, and their evaluation is lazy
-   **Futures** are mutable, blocking, only once and their evaluation is parallel
-   **Promises** are mutable, blocking and updated only once
-   **Atoms** are mutable, non blocking, and linearizable
-   **Refs** are mutable, non blocking and serializable

### Exercises from Clojure from the Ground Up (Chapter 6)

We start with this program to compute the sum of the first 10,000,000 numbers:

```clojure
user=> (defn sum [start end] (reduce + (range start end)))
user=> (time (sum 0 1e7))
"Elapsed time: 1001.295323 msecs"
49999995000000
```

#### 1. Use delay to compute this sum lazily; show that it takes no time to return the delay, but roughly 1 second to deref.

We have covered how to set the delay earlier in this chapter.

```clojure
user=>
(defn sum [start end] (reduce + (range start end)))
#'user/sum
user=>
(time (def later (delay (sum 0 1e7))))
"Elapsed time: 0.223565 msecs"
#'user/later
user=>
(time (deref later))
"Elapsed time: 907.876844 msecs"
49999995000000
```

#### 2 We can do the computation in a new thread directly, using (.start (Thread. (fn [] (sum 0 1e7)))–but this simply runs the (sum) function and discards the results. Use a promise to hand the result back out of the thread. Use this technique to write your own version of the future macro.

```clojure
user=>
(def promise-sum (promise))
#'user/promise-sum
user=>
(.start (Thread. (fn [] (deliver promise-sum (sum 0 1e7)))))
nil
user=>
(deref promise-sum)
49999995000000
```

And for my own version of futures, as a reminder "futures return immediately, and give us an **identity** which will point to the value of the last expression in the future". So we need to return a function that will deref the promise:

```clojure
(defn my-future [promise f & args]
  (do
    (.start (Thread. (deliver promise (f args))))
        (fn [] (deref promise))))
```

Here is how you use it:

```clojure
user=> (def promise1 (promise))
#'user/promise1
user=> (defn my-future [promise f & args]
  (do
    (.start (Thread. (deliver promise (f args))))
        (fn [] (deref promise))))
#'user/my-future
user=> (def get-value (my-future promise1 count 1))
#'user/get-value
user=>
(get-value)
1
```

#### 3 If your computer has two cores, you can do this expensive computation twice as fast by splitting it into two parts: (sum 0 (/ 1e7 2)), and (sum (/ 1e7 2) 1e7), then adding those parts together. Use future to do both parts at once, and show that this strategy gets the same answer as the single-threaded version, but takes roughly half the time.

````clojure
(time (let [a (future (sum 0 (/ 1e7 2)))
            b (future (sum (/ 1e7 2) 1e7))]
        (+ @a @b)))```
And the results:
```clojure
user=> (time (let [a (future (sum 0 (/ 1e7 2)))
            b (future (sum (/ 1e7 2) 1e7))]
        (+ @a @b)))
"Elapsed time: 590.256155 msecs"
4.9999995E13
````

#### 4 Instead of using reduce, store the sum in an atom and use two futures to add each number from the lower and upper range to that atom. Wait for both futures to complete using deref, then check that the atom contains the right number. Is this technique faster or slower than reduce? Why do you think that might be?

```clojure
(defn my-sum [start end]
	(let [result (atom 0)]
    	(let
      		[a (future (doseq [i (range start (/ end 2))] (swap! result + i)))
      		 b (future (doseq [i (range (/ end 2) end)] (swap! result + i)))] @a @b)
	@result))
```

#### 5 Write a function which, in a dosync transaction, removes the first number in work and adds it to sum. Then, in two futures, call that function over and over again until there’s no work left. Verify that @sum is 4999950000. Experiment with different combinations of alter and commute–if both are correct, is one faster? Does using deref instead of ensure change the result?

```clojure
(def work (ref (apply list (range 1e5))))
(def sum (ref 0))

(defn dowork []
  (dosync
   	(alter sum + (first @work))
	(alter work rest)
   	(count @work)))

(while (pos? (count @work)) dowork)
```

For this exercise, I got most of it to work, however the while loop hangs and I am not sure what the best solution is for the future.

## Always use the local REPL over an online one

I've been cheating and I have been using the repl.it one for quick experimentation. I know that I would get autocomplete and a lot of other little benefits that I don't get online (the repl.it... REPL is pretty barebone), but when my laptop is driving two 1440p screens, Roam for the notes, other chrome tabs, adding VS Code with Calva to the lot it is a little bit too much. Well, I will probably not do that anymore as I have encountered many issues and programs that are supposed to run without any issue, just don't online. Lesson learned. It took me forever to complete the first exercise, thinking my code was wrong, when it was in fact the REPL faulting me.

## Takeaways

This chapter was quite confusing and I definitely need to give it another read to solidity some of this knowledge (and to make sense of it) -- but I am glad I did it.

Let's end the day with a tally of what I completed (which is much more than I anticipated!):

-   Completed Chapter 6 of Clojure From the Ground Up and its problems (that wasn't easy!)
-   No 4clojure problem today :(
-   Wrote my longest update, with almost 1260+ words (code snippets help)
    See you tomorrow!
