# Learning Clojure in Public - Week 5 Day 7 (35/35)

## Expectations

Last day of ClojureFam. I started very late so I don't expect to get a lot done.

## What I Did

### Attempting to display the filter element by clicking on the filter icon in the linked references

I did find the button in `views/node_page.cljs`, which is the first step:

```diff
@@ -289,7 +308,7 @@
                 [:h4 (use-style references-heading-style)
                  [(r/adapt-react-class mui-icons/Link)]
                  [:span linked-or-unlinked]
-                 [button {:disabled true} [(r/adapt-react-class mui-icons/FilterList)]]]
+                 [button {:on-click (fn [] (js/alert "hello"))} [(r/adapt-react-class mui-icons/FilterList)]]]
                 [:div (use-style references-list-style)
                  (doall
                    (for [[group-title group] refs]

```

However, I have not yet been able to show the element itself. Displaying it not on demand would be easy, as it is done in `devcards/filters.cljs`:

```clojure
(defcard-rg Filters
  [:div (use-style devcard-wrapper)
   [filters-el "((some-uid))" items]])
```

### 4Clojure's 44th problem

So I was stuck on this filter problem so I decided to try my hand at something else I have been stuck on, and it's 4Clojure's 44th problem. I had the case with positive rotation down, but had issues with how to use `mod` to make the negative rotations work.

The problem was to rotate a sequence in any direction, by a number `n`. Intuitively the rotation, for positive `n`s is the following:

```clojure
(fn my-rotate [n coll]
    (concat (drop n coll) (take n coll)))
```

I had been trying to come up with complex solutions, and if statement to solve this, when the only thing I actually need is for `n` to be 3 when it started as -2. I just tried out, without even thinking about it, `(mod -2 5)` and got 3, which is why I tried the following, which got me to the right answer:

```diff
diff
(fn my-rotate [n coll]
+  (let [n (mod n (count coll))]
    (concat (drop n coll) (take n coll))))
```

## Takeaways

It's been an amazing experience and I wish I could finish it with a bang but there is still so much to do, so much to learn. I do plan to write my thoughts about the program, what I liked, what I would change but I still have to get my thought together. It has felt like a sprint and I need time to reflect.

Still sad I didn't get more done today, but I got started very late and have to get ready for the week. It's still good that I was able to get some work done. I will probably take it easy this week but will still try to get a few things done. Some contributions to Athens, as well as all the things I didn't have time to do while doing the program (correct setup of text editor, etc.).
