# Learning Clojure in Public - Week 5 Day 6 (34/35)

## Expectations

Sleepy Saturday, low expectations and second to last day of ClojureFam. I do have code to fix the scrolling issue in the slash commands in Athena (see [yesterday's update](./2020-07-25.md)). The expectation is to finish the code for it and open the pull request.

## What I Did

I fixed the out of bounds issue that was actually caused by the function referencing a nil variable. The linter didn't complain because the variable was actually being declared in the scope but it was for another case in the `cond` that had nothing to do with slash commands.

I also removed the element selection using an id, and instead used a (I think) overly complicated combination of parent and siblings selectors. This is the end result:

```diff
                        (= :up direction) (do
                                            (.. e preventDefault)
                                            (swap! state update :search/index #(dec (if (zero? %) (count slash-options) %)))
+                                            (let [cur-index (:search/index @state)
                                                  container-el (.. e -target -parentNode -parentNode -nextSibling -firstChild)
                                                  next-el (nth (array-seq (.. container-el -children)) cur-index)]
                                              (when (is-beyond-rect? next-el (.. container-el -parentNode))
                                                (.. next-el (scrollIntoView false {:behavior "auto"})))))
```

## Takeaways

I feel like I'm learning a lot more by writing actual code, for production rather than little algorithms on the side. Don't get me wrong, it was good in the beginning but this is the current best way for me to learn.
This is also the second to last day of ClojureFam, on a week end, and I feel the fatigue. I may have to take a break next week, for a couple of days maybe read a book. But the experience has been amazing and I'll be sure to continue in the next weeks. I hope to make a lot more contributions to the Athens codebase.
